## Constants
"Being unable to change the value of a variable might have reminded you of another programming concept that most other languages have: constants. Like immutable variables, constants are values that are bound to a name and are not allowed to change, but there are a few differences between constants and variables. First, you aren’t allowed to use mut with constants. Constants aren’t just immutable by default—they’re always immutable. You declare constants using the const keyword instead of the let keyword, and the type of the value <b>must</b> be annotated." - The Rust Programming Language, page 34

Constant example:
```rust
//You can add _ inside number literals to increase readability
//It is a convention to name constants in all caps
//the value is 100000200
const CONSTANT_ONE: i64 = 100_000_200
```

## Shadowing

"You can declare a new variable with the same name as a previous variable in order to shadow the previous variable. Rustaceans say that the first variable is shadowed by the second, which means that the second variable’s value is what appears when the variable is used." - The Rust Programming Language, page 34

Shadowing example:

```rust
let x = 5;
let x = x + 1;
let x = x * 2;
//This will print out 12
println!("{}", x);
```

The main reason we use shadowing is to change the type of a variable, like the example below:

```rust
let x: String = String::from("12");
let x: i32 = x.trim().parse().expect("not a number!");
```

## Scalar types

1. Integer types

    | Length | Signed | Unsigned |
    | ------ | ------ | -------- | 
    | 8-bit  | i8     | u8
    | 16-bit| i16 | u16
    |32-bit|i32| u32
    |64-bit| i64| u64
    128-bit|i128| u128
    arch|isize|usize
2. Integer literals

    Number literals|Example|Decimal
    |-------|------|------|
    98_222|Hex|0xff
    Octal|0o77|Binary
    0b1111_0000|Byte (u8 only)|b'A'

## Floating-Point Types
Rust also has two primitive types for floating-point numbers, which are
numbers with decimal points. Rust’s floating-point types are f32 and f64,
which are 32 bits and 64 bits in size, respectively. The default type is f64
because on modern CPUs it’s roughly the same speed as f32 but is capable
of more precision.

## The Boolean Type
As in most other programming languages, a Boolean type in Rust has two
possible values: true and false. Booleans are one byte in size. The Boolean
type in Rust is specified using bool. For example:

```rust
let f: bool = false; // with explicit type annotation
```

## The Character Type
So far we’ve worked only with numbers, but Rust supports letters too. Rust’s
char type is the language’s most primitive alphabetic type, and the follow-
ing code shows one way to use it. (Note that char literals are specified with
single quotes, as opposed to string literals, which use double quotes.)

```rust
let c = 'z';
let z = 'Ƶ';
let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
```

Rust’s char type is four bytes in size and represents a Unicode Scalar
Value, which means it can represent a lot more than just ASCII. Accented
letters; Chinese, Japanese, and Korean characters; emoji; and zero-width
spaces are all valid char values in Rust.

## Compound Types
Compound types can group multiple values into one type. Rust has two
primitive compound types: tuples and arrays.

1. The Tuple Type
    A tuple is a general way of grouping together some number of other values with a variety of types into one compound type. Tuples have a fixed length: once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size. We create a tuple by writing a comma-separated list of values inside parentheses. Each position in the tuple has a type, and the types of the different values in the tuple don’t have to be the same. We’ve added optional type annotations in this example:

    ```rust
    let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
    ```

    The variable tup binds to the entire tuple, because a tuple is considered a single compound element. To get the individual values out of a tuple, we can use pattern matching to destructure a tuple value, like this:

    ```rust
    let (x, y, z) = tup;
    println!("The value of y is: {}", y);
    //output: The value of y is: 1
    ```
    
    In addition to destructuring through pattern matching, we can access a tuple element directly by using a period ( .) followed by the index of the value we want to access. For example:

    ```rust
    let x: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
    let five_hundred = x.0;
    let six_point_four = x.1;
    let one = x.2;
    ```

2. The Array Type

    Another way to have a collection of multiple values is with an array. Unlike a tuple, every element of an array must have the same type. Arrays in Rust are different from arrays in some other languages because arrays in Rust have a fixed length, like tuples. In Rust, the values going into an array are written as a comma-separated list inside square brackets:

    ```rust
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    ```

    You would write an array’s type by using square brackets, and within the brackets include the type of each element, a semicolon, and then the number of elements in the array, like so:

    ```rust
    let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    ```

    Writing an array’s type this way looks similar to an alternative syntax for initializing an array: if you want to create an array that contains the same value for each element, you can specify the initial value, followed by a semi-colon, and then the length of the array in square brackets, as shown here:

    ```rust
    let a = [3; 5];
    ```

    An array is a single chunk of memory allocated on the stack. You can access elements of an array using indexing, like this:

    ```rust
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    let first = a[0];
    let second = a[1];
    ```

    Make sure to not access elements outside the range of the array as that can lead to invalid memory access errors

## Functions

Function definitions in Rust start with fn and have a set of parentheses after the function name. The curly brackets tell the compiler where the function body begins and ends.

We can call any function we’ve defined by entering its name followed by a set of parentheses. Because another_function is defined in the program, it can be called from inside the main function.

```rust
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");
    another_function();
}

fn another_function() {
    println!("Another function.");
}

/*
Output: Hello, world!
Another function.
*/
```

## Function parameters
Functions can also be defined to have parameters, which are special variables that are part of a function’s signature. When a function has parameters, you can provide it with concrete values for those parameters. Technically, the concrete values are called arguments, but in casual conversation, people tend to use the words parameter and argument interchangeably for either thevariables in a function’s definition or the concrete values passed in when you call a function.

In function signatures, you must declare the type of each parameter.
This is a deliberate decision in Rust’s design: requiring type annotations in function definitions means the compiler almost never needs you to use them elsewhere in the code to figure out what you mean. Example:

```rust
fn main() {
    another_function(5, 6);
}

fn another_function(x: i32, y: i32) {
    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
    println!("The value of y is: {}", y);
}
```

## Statements and Expressions in Function Bodies
Function bodies are made up of a series of statements optionally ending in an expression. So far, we’ve only covered functions without an ending expression, but you have seen an expression as part of a statement. Because Rust is an expression-based language, this is an important distinction to understand. Other languages don’t have the same distinctions, so let’s look at what statements and expressions are and how their differences affect the bodies of functions. We’ve actually already used statements and expressions. Statements are instructions that perform some action and do not return a value. Expressions evaluate to a resulting value.

## Functions with Return Values
Functions can return values to the code that calls them. We don’t name return values, but we do declare their type after an arrow (->). In Rust, the return value of the function is synonymous with the value of the final expression in the block of the body of a function.

```rust
fn five() -> i32 {
    5
}
```

There are no function calls, macros, or even let statements in the five
function—just the number 5 by itself. That’s a perfectly valid function in
Rust.

## if Expressions
An if expression allows you to branch your code depending on conditions. You provide a condition and then state, “If this condition is met, run this block of code. If the condition is not met, do not run this block of code.”

```rust
if 2 < 5 {
    println!("condition was true");
} else {
    println!("condition was false");
}
```

Unlike languages such as Ruby and JavaScript, Rust will not automatically try to convert non-Boolean types to a Boolean. You must be explicit and always provide if with a Boolean as its condition. If we want the if code block to run only when a number is not equal to 0, for example, we can change the if expression to number != 0

## Using if in a let Statement
Because if is an expression, we can use it on the right side of a let statement

```rust
let condition = true;
let number = if condition {
            5
        } else {
            6
        };

```

The values that have the potential to be results from each arm of the if must be the same type, otherwise you will get an error because the Rust compiler cannot automatically detect a type for the variable

## Repeating Code with loop 
The loop keyword tells Rust to execute a block of code over and over again forever or until you explicitly tell it to stop with a break keyword.

```rust
fn main() {
    loop {
        println!("again!");
    }
}
```

## Returning Values from Loops
One of the uses of a loop is to retry an operation you know might fail, such as checking whether a thread has completed its job. However, you might need to pass the result of that operation to the rest of your code. To do this, you can add the value you want returned after the break expression you use to stop the loop; that value will be returned out of the loop so you can use it, as shown here:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut counter = 0;
    let result = loop {
        counter += 1;
        if counter == 10 {
            break counter * 2;
        }
    };
    println!("The result is {}", result);
}
```

## Conditional Loops with while
It’s often useful for a program to evaluate a condition within a loop. While the condition is true, the loop runs. When the condition ceases to be true, the program calls break, stopping the loop. This loop type could be implemented using a combination of loop, if, else, and break; you could try that now in a program, if you’d like. However, this pattern is so common that Rust has a built-in language construct for it, called a <b>while</b> loop.

```rust
let mut number = 5;

//countdown from 5 to 0
while number != 0 {
    println!("{}!", number);
    number = number - 1;
}
```

## Looping Through a Collection with for
You could use the while construct to loop over the elements of a collection, such as an array.

```rust
let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];
let mut index = 0;
while index < 5 {
    println!("the value is: {}", a[index]);
    index = index + 1;
}
```

But this approach is error prone; we could cause the program to panic if the index length is incorrect. It’s also slow, because the compiler adds runtime code to perform the conditional check on every element on every iteration through the loop. As a more concise alternative, you can use a <b>for</b> loop and execute some code for each item in a collection.

```rust
let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];
for element in a.iter() {
    println!("the value is: {}", element);
}
```

Even though you can still use while loops for situations where you increment/decrement numbers, the convention is that you should still use for loops. The way to use for loops in this context is through ranges.

```rust
//Countdown but with for loop
for number in (1..4).rev() {
    println!("{}!", number);
}
println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
```       