# Chapter 5: using structs to structure related data

A struct, or structure, is a custom data type that lets you name and package together multiple related values that make up a meaningful group. If you’re familiar with an object-oriented language, a struct is like an object’s data attributes. In this chapter, we’ll compare and contrast tuples with structs, demonstrate how to use structs, and discuss how to define methods and associated functions to specify behavior associted with a struct’s data.

## Defining and Instantiating Structs
Structs are similar to tuples, which were discussed in Chapter 3. Like tuples, the pieces of a struct can be different types. Unlike with tuples, you’ll name each piece of data so it’s clear what the values mean. Here's an example of a struct:

```rust
struct User {
    username: String,
    email: String,
    sign_in_count: u64,
    active: bool,
}
```

To use a struct after we’ve defined it, we create an <i>instance</i> of that struct by specifying concrete values for each of the fields. We create an instance by stating the name of the struct and then add curly brackets containing key: value pairs, where the keys are the names of the fields and the values are the data we want to store in those fields.

```rust
let user1 = User {
    email: String::from("someone@example.com"),
    username: String::from("someusername123"),
    active: true,
    sign_in_count: 1,
};
```

To get a specific value from a struct, we can use dot notation. If we wanted just this user’s email address, we could use `user1.email` wherever we wanted to use this value. If the instance is mutable, we can change a value by using the dot notation and assigning into a particular field. Note that the entire instance must be mutable; Rust doesn’t allow us to mark only certain fields as mutable. As with any expression, we can construct a new instance of the struct as the last expression in the function body to implicitly return that new instance.

```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
    User {
        email: email,
        username: username,
        active: true,
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```

It makes sense to name the function parameters with the same name as the struct fields, but having to repeat the email and username field names and variables is a bit tedious. Luckily, there’s a convenient shorthand!

## Using the Field Init Shorthand When Variables and Fields Have the Same Name

Because the parameter names and the struct field names are exactly the same, we can use the field init shorthand syntax to rewrite build_user so that it behaves exactly the same but doesn’t have the repetition of email and username.

```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
    User {
        email,
        username,
        active: true,
        sign_in_count: 1,
    }
}
```

## Creating Instances from Other Instances with Struct Update Syntax

It’s often useful to create a new instance of a struct that uses most of an old instance’s values but changes some. You’ll do this using struct update syntax.

Example without struct update syntax:
```rust
let user2 = User {
    email: String::from("another@example.com"),
    username: String::from("anotherusername567"),
    active: user1.active,
    sign_in_count: user1.sign_in_count,
};
```

Example with struct update syntax:
```rust
let user2 = User {
    email: String::from("another@example.com"),
    username: String::from("anotherusername567"),
    ..user1
};
```

# Using Tuple Structs Without Named Fields to Create Different Types

You can also define structs that look similar to tuples, called tuple structs. Tuple structs have the added meaning the struct name provides but don’t have names associated with their fields; rather, they just have the types of the fields. Tuple structs are useful when you want to give the whole tuple a name and make the tuple be a different type from other tuples, and naming each field as in a regular struct would be verbose or redundant.

```rust
//definition
struct Color(i32, i32, i32);
struct Point(i32, i32, i32);
//creation of instances
let black = Color(0, 0, 0);
let origin = Point(0, 0, 0);
```

A function that takes a parameter of type Color cannot take a Point as an argument, even though both types are made up of three i32 values. Otherwise, tuple struct instances behave like tuples: you can destructure them into their individual pieces, you can use a . followed by the index to access an individual value, and so on.

## Unit-Like Structs Without Any Fields

You can also define structs that don’t have any fields! These are called unit-like structs because they behave similarly to (), the unit type. Unit-like structs can be useful in situations in which you need to implement a trait on some type but don’t have any data that you want to store in the type itself.

```rust
struct Unit;
```

## An Example Program Using Structs and Tuples

Area of a rectangle using tuples

```rust
fn main() {
    let rect1 = (30, 50);
    println!("The area of the rectangle is {} square pixels.",
                area(rect1));
}

fn area(dimensions: (u32, u32)) -> u32 {
    dimensions.0 * dimensions.1
}
```
Refactored using a struct
```rust
struct Rectangle {
    width: u64,
    height: u64,
}

fn main() {
    let mut rect = Rectangle {
        width : 30,
        height: 50,
    };

    println!("The area is: {}", area(&rect));
}

fn area(rectangle: &Rectangle) -> u32 {
    rectangle.width * rectangle.height
}
```

## Adding Useful Functionality with Derived Traits

It’d be nice to be able to print an instance of Rectangle while we’re debugging our program and see the values for all its fields. Simply passing a struct to a placeholder won’t work, however.

```rust
println!("rect1 is {}", rect1);
//Compiler error:
//error[E0277]: `Rectangle` doesn't implement `std::fmt::Display`
//= help: the trait `std::fmt::Display` is not implemented for `Rectangle`
//= note: in format strings you may be able to use `{:?}` (or {:#?} for pretty-print) instead
```

This happens because we have not really specified a way in which a Rectangle struct will be displayed as a string. An easy way to do this is by deriving the "debug" trait and by putting the :? format specifier inside the {}

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
struct Rectangle {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
}

let rect1 = Rectangle { width: 30, height: 50 };
println!("rect1 is {:?}", rect1);

//Output: rect1 is Rectangle { width: 30, height: 50 }
```

The output can be made to look prettier by using :#? instead of :?. When using this specifier, the output will look like this.

```
rect1 is Rectangle {
    width: 30,
    height: 50
}
```

Rust has provided a number of traits for us to use with the derive annotation that can add useful behavior to our custom types.

## Methods

Methods are similar to functions: they’re declared with the fn keyword and their name, they can have parameters and a return value, and they contain some code that is run when they’re called from somewhere else. However, methods are different from functions in that they’re defined within the context of a struct (or an enum or a trait object), and their first parameter is always self, which represents the instance of the struct the method is being called on.

## Defining Methods
Let’s change the area function that has a Rectangle instance as a parameter
and instead make an area method defined on the Rectangle struct

```rust
use std::cmp::Ordering;

struct Rectangle {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
}

//Begin implementation block
impl Rectangle {
    /*
    [Begin method implementation]
    We’ve chosen &self here for the same reason we used &Rectangle in the
    function version: we don’t want to take ownership, and we just want to read
    the data in the struct, not write to it. If we wanted to change the instance
    that we’ve called the method on as part of what the method does, we’d use
    &mut self as the first parameter.
    */
    fn area(&self) -> u32 {
        self.width * self.height
    }

    /* The definition of methods with more than one parameter is done by
    adding parameters past the self parameter, this example compares the rectangle where the
    method is being called from with another rectangle
    */
    fn comp_areas(&self, other_rect: &Rectangle) -> Ordering {
        self.area().cmp(&other_rect.area())
    }
}


fn main() {
    let mut rect1 = Rectangle {
        width: 30,
        height: 50,
    };

    let mut rect2 = Rectangle {
        width: 40,
        height: 10,
    };

    println!("The area is: {}", rect1.area());

    println!("Rectangle 1 is {} Rectangle 2",
             match rect1.comp_areas(&rect2){
                Ordering::Less => "smaller than",
                Ordering::Equal => "equal to",
                Ordering::Greater => "greater than",
             })
}
```

You can also have multiple `impl` blocks, there's no reason to do it, but the program will compile regardless.

## Bonus: WHERE’S THE -> OPERATOR?
In C and C++, two different operators are used for calling methods: you use the . operator if you’re calling a method on the object directly and the -> operator if you’re calling the method on a pointer to the object and need to dereference the pointer first. In other words, if object is a pointer, `object->something()` is similar to `(*object).something()`. Rust doesn’t have an equivalent to the -> operator; instead, Rust has a feature called <b>automatic referencing and dereferencing</b>. Calling methods is one of the few places in Rust that has this behavior. Here’s how it works: when you call a method with `object.something()`, Rust automatically adds in &, &mut, or * so object matches the signature of the method. In other words, the following are the same:
```rust
p1.distance(&p2);
(&p1).distance(&p2);
```
The first one looks much cleaner. This automatic referencing behavior works because methods have a clear receiver—the type of self. Given the receiver and name of a method, Rust can figure out definitively whether the method is reading (&self), mutating (&mut self), or consuming (self). The fact that Rust makes borrowing implicit for method receivers is a big part of making ownership ergonomic in practice.

## Associated Functions
Another useful feature of impl blocks is that we’re allowed to define functions within impl blocks that don’t take `self` as a parameter. These are called associated functions because they’re associated with the struct. They’re still functions, not methods, because they don’t have an instance of the struct to work with. You’ve already used the `String::from` associated function. Associated functions are often used for constructors that will return a new instance of the struct.

 For example, we could provide an associated function that would have one dimension parameter and use that as both width and height, thus making it easier to create a square Rectangle rather than having to specify the same value twice:

```rust
impl Rectangle {
    fn square(size: u32) -> Rectangle {
        Rectangle { width: size, height: size }
    }
}
 ```

 To call this associated function, we use the :: syntax with the struct name; `let sq = Rectangle::square(3);` is an example.

 ## Summary
 Structs let you create custom types that are meaningful for your domain. By using structs, you can keep associated pieces of data connected to each other and name each piece to make your code clear. Methods let you specify the behavior that instances of your structs have, and associated functions let you namespace functionality that is particular to your struct without having an instance available. But structs aren’t the only way you can create custom types: let’s turn to Rust’s enum feature to add another tool to your toolbox.